PHPORM-186 GridFS adapter for Filesystem (#2985)
jenssegers/laravel-mongodb: docs/filesystems.txt

> .. _laravel-queues:
> 
> ======
> Queues
> ======

Reviewer: I: Edit the page title and ref anchor to reflect the content:
```suggestion
.. _laravel-gridfs:

======
GridFS
======
```

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, gridfs, code example

Overview
--------

Using MongoDB to store files can be done using the

> `GridFS Adapter for Flysystem <https://flysystem.thephpleague.com/docs/adapter/gridfs/>`__.

Reviewer: S: to avoid the repetition of "using", you could reword this part a little. I'd also clarify which types of files you can store with GridFS.

```suggestion
You can use the
`GridFS Adapter for Flysystem <https://flysystem.thephpleague.com/docs/adapter/gridfs/>`__ to store large files in MongoDB.
```

GridFS lets you store files of unlimited size in the same database as your data.

> This ensures the integrity of transactions and backups.

Reviewer 2: Driver implementations of GridFS do not support transactions ([DRIVERS-2062](https://jira.mongodb.org/browse/DRIVERS-2062)).

Author: Noted, that's too bad.

Configuration
-------------

> Before using the GridFS driver, you will need to install the Flysystem GridFS package via the Composer package manager:

Reviewer: S: we try to avoid the [future tense](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/voice-and-tone/#best-practices) and ["via"](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/general-term-guidelines/avoid-obscure-words/) in the docs. Also, I'd edit this sentence slightly so it introduces the code example:

```suggestion
Before using the GridFS driver, install the Flysystem GridFS package through the Composer package manager by running the following command:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   composer require league/flysystem-gridfs

> Configure `Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__,

Reviewer: S: you can remove this comma
```suggestion
Configure `Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__
```

to use the ``gridfs`` driver in ``config/filesystems.php``:

.. code-block:: php

   'disks' => [
       'gridfs' => [
           'driver' => 'gridfs',
           'connection' => 'mongodb',
           'database' => 'files',
           'bucket' => 'fs',
           'prefix' => '',
           'read-only' => false,

>            'throw' => false,

Reviewer 2: Is this the complete list of supported options, with default values repeated just so users know what they can set? Since you have a table below with all options, I'd consider reducing this code example to just the necessary options.

Author: Why not, but personally I find the complete example more synthetic and quicker to read, or even copy and paste.
I understand that we want developers to use the default minimal config, so that's what I'm going to keep.

Reviewer 2: > I find the complete example more synthetic and quicker to read

Same. If this example was annotated with comments to call out default values (and thus assist user's with reducing their own config) I think it'd stand well on its own and we wouldn't even need the table that follows.

Author: Added optional settings in comments. Keeping the table for details.

       ],
   ],

> 

Reviewer: S: Add a sentence that introduces this table, like:
```suggestion
You can configure the following ``gridfs`` settings in ``config/filesystems.php``: 
```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``driver``
     - **Required**. Specifies the filesystem driver to use. Must be ``gridfs`` for MongoDB.

   * - ``connection``
     - The database connection used to store jobs. It must be a ``mongodb`` connection. The driver uses the default connection if a connection is not specified.

   * - ``database``

>      - Name of the MongoDB database fot the GridFS bucket. Use the database of the connection if not specified.

Reviewer: S: small typo, and I think you can reword the second sentence so it's more complete:

```suggestion
     - Name of the MongoDB database for the GridFS bucket. The driver uses the database of the connection if a database is not specified.
```

   * - ``bucket``

>      - Name of the GridFS bucket. A database can contain multiple buckets identified by their name. Defaults to ``fs``.

Reviewer 2: Based on the example below, shouldn't this description also mention that this option accepts a `MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket` instance?

   * - ``prefix``
     - Specifies a prefix for the name of the files that are stored in the bucket. Using a distinct bucket is recommended
       in order to store the files in a different collection.

   * - ``read-only``
     - If ``true``, writing to the GridFS bucket is disabled. Write operations will return ``false`` or throw exceptions
       depending on the configuration of ``throw``. Defaults to ``false``.

   * - ``throw``

>      - If ``true``, exceptions are thrown when an operation cannot be performed. Defaults to ``false``, the operations
>        return ``true`` in case of succes, ``false`` in case of error.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence looks like a run-on. Consider:

```suggestion
     - If ``true``, exceptions are thrown when an operation cannot be performed. If ``false``,
       operations return ``true`` on success and ``false`` on error. Defaults to ``false``.
```

> If you have specific requirements, you can use a factory or a service name to define the bucket. The options

Reviewer: Q: what do you mean by "specific requirements"? I think it would be helpful to clarify them here

``connection`` and ``database`` are ignored when a ``MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket`` is provided:

.. code-block:: php

    use Illuminate\Foundation\Application;
    use MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket;

   'disks' => [
       'gridfs' => [
           'driver' => 'gridfs',
           'bucket' => static function (Application $app): Bucket {
               return $app['db']->connection('mongodb')
                   ->getMongoDB()
                   ->selectGridFSBucket([
                       'bucketName' => 'avatars',
                       'chunkSizeBytes' => 261120,
                   ]);
           },
       ],
   ],

Usage
-----

> The benefits of using Laravel File Storage facade, is that it provides a common
> interface for all the supported file systems. Use the ``gridfs`` disk in the

Reviewer 2: I don't think the comma serves a purpose here. Consider instead:

```suggestion
A benefit of using Laravel's File Storage facade is that it provides a common
interface for all the supported file systems. Use the ``gridfs`` disk in the
```

Alternatively "the Laravel's File Storage". Also, the facade is just the API using `Storage::`, no? Would it be more correct to refer to this as a component? I'll defer to you.

I assume this is what we're referring to: https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/filesystem

same way as the ``local`` disk.

.. code-block:: php

   $disk = Storage::disk('gridfs');

   // Write the file "hello.txt" into GridFS
   $disk->put('hello.txt', 'Hello World!');

   // Read the file
   echo $disk->get('hello.txt'); // Hello World!

To learn more Laravel File Storage, see

> `Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__.

Reviewer: S: clarify where this link comes from
```suggestion
`Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__ in the Laravel documentation.
```

Versioning
----------

> In GridFS, file names are metadata to file objects identified by unique MongoDB ObjectID.
> There may be more than one file with the same name, they are called "revisions":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In GridFS, file names are metadata in file documents identified by unique MongoDB ObjectID.
If multiple documents share the same file name, they are considered "revisions" and
further distinguished by creation timestamps.
```

I'm using the word "timestamps" here, but if you think that might cause some confusion (re: BSON timestamp type), you may want to use "date" instead.

> 

Reviewer: S: introduce this list with something like:
```suggestion
GridFS operations interact with file revisions in the following ways:
```

- Reading a file reads the last revision of this file name
- Writing to a file name creates a new revision for this file name
- Renaming a file renames all the revisions of this file name
- Deleting a file deletes all the revisions of this file name

The GridFS Adapter for Flysystem does not provide access to a specific revision

> of a filename, you must use the :manual:`GridFS API </tutorial/gridfs/>` if you

Reviewer 2: Does `:manual:` link to the PHPLIB docs? I assume this is the intended target: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/tutorial/gridfs/

Reviewer: `:manual:` links to the Server manual, so I'd remove it here and just use the full https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/tutorial/gridfs/ link

> of a filename, you must use the :manual:`GridFS API </tutorial/gridfs/>` if you

Reviewer: I: break these two independent clauses into different sentences
```suggestion
of a filename. You must use the :manual:`GridFS API </tutorial/gridfs/>` if you
```

> need to work with revisions.

Reviewer: S: add to this sentence so it introduces the code example
```suggestion
need to work with revisions, as shown in the following code:
```

   * - ``database``
     - Name of the MongoDB database for the GridFS bucket. The driver uses the database of the connection if a database is not specified.

   * - ``bucket``
     - Name or instance of the GridFS bucket. A database can contain multiple buckets identified by their name. Defaults to ``fs``.

   * - ``prefix``
     - Specifies a prefix for the name of the files that are stored in the bucket. Using a distinct bucket is recommended
       in order to store the files in a different collection.

   * - ``read-only``
     - If ``true``, writing to the GridFS bucket is disabled. Write operations will return ``false`` or throw exceptions
       depending on the configuration of ``throw``. Defaults to ``false``.

   * - ``throw``
     - If ``true``, exceptions are thrown when an operation cannot be performed. If ``false``,
	   operations return ``true`` on success and ``false`` on error. Defaults to ``false``.

You can also use a factory or a service name to create an instance of ``MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket``.
In this case, the options ``connection`` and ``database`` are ignored:

.. code-block:: php

    use Illuminate\Foundation\Application;

>     use MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   use Illuminate\Foundation\Application;
   use MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket;
```

Consistent indentation with `'disks'` below. Code blocks use a three-space indent.

   'disks' => [
       'gridfs' => [
           'driver' => 'gridfs',
           'bucket' => static function (Application $app): Bucket {
               return $app['db']->connection('mongodb')
                   ->getMongoDB()
                   ->selectGridFSBucket([
                       'bucketName' => 'avatars',
                       'chunkSizeBytes' => 261120,
                   ]);
           },
       ],
   ],

Usage
-----

A benefit of using Laravel Filesystem is that it provides a common interface
for all the supported file systems. You can use the ``gridfs`` disk in the same
way as the ``local`` disk.

.. code-block:: php

   $disk = Storage::disk('gridfs');

   // Write the file "hello.txt" into GridFS
   $disk->put('hello.txt', 'Hello World!');

   // Read the file
   echo $disk->get('hello.txt'); // Hello World!

To learn more Laravel File Storage, see
`Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__
in the Laravel documentation.

Versioning
----------

In GridFS, file names are metadata in file documents identified by unique

> MongoDB ObjectID. If multiple documents share the same file name, they are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
File names in GridFS are metadata in file documents, which are identified by
unique ObjectIDs. If multiple documents share the same file name, they are
```

Moving the comma around to make this more readable. Also dropped the MongoDB prefix for ObjectID (seemed redundant) and fixed subject/verb agreement.

considered "revisions" and further distinguished by creation timestamps.

The Laravel MongoDB integration uses the GridFS Flysystem adapter. It interacts
with file revisions in the following ways:

- Reading a file reads the last revision of this file name
- Writing a file creates a new revision for this file name
- Renaming a file renames all the revisions of this file name
- Deleting a file deletes all the revisions of this file name

The GridFS Adapter for Flysystem does not provide access to a specific revision
of a filename. You must use the
`GridFS API <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/tutorial/gridfs/>`__
if you need to work with revisions, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: php

   // Create a bucket service from the MongoDB connection
   /** @var \MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket $bucket */
   $bucket = $app['db']->connection('mongodb')->getMongoDB()->selectGridFSBucket();

   // Download the last but one version of a file

>    $bucket->openDownloadStreamByName('hello.txt', ['revision' => -2])

Reviewer 2: Since PathPrefixer doesn't apply here, would users need to write `/hello.txt`, or do the prefixes only kick in when a path is used? I expect this could be a pain point for users, that may warrant a note.

Author: We don't use the leading `/` in the [PHP GridFS documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/v1.17/tutorial/gridfs/#uploading-files-with-writable-streams). I don't know what to write in a note.

Reviewer 2: There's no prefixing done in PHPLIB, so the filename is used exactly as provided.

My question here is: would `hello.txt` here refer to the same file written by Flysystem, or would you need to use `/hello.txt`? It's not clear to me if Flysystem adds a prefix to every file name or just those that appear to use paths (i.e. already contain a `/` somewhere in the middle of the string).

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is answered by https://github.com/mongodb/laravel-mongodb/pull/2985#discussion_r1625525675. In that case, I suppose the note would be to remind users that prefixing is entirely handled by Flysystem. So if they're using a non-empty `prefix` option they'll need to ensure that filenames are prefixed manually when using PHPLIB directly.

Author: Flysystem always adds the prefix to the file name stored in MongoDB.

.. _laravel-filesystems:

==================
GridFS Filesystems
==================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: tutorial

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, gridfs, code example

Overview
--------

You can use the
`GridFS Adapter for Flysystem <https://flysystem.thephpleague.com/docs/adapter/gridfs/>`__
to store large files in MongoDB.
GridFS lets you store files of unlimited size in the same database as your data.

Configuration
-------------

Before using the GridFS driver, install the Flysystem GridFS package through the
Composer package manager by running the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

   composer require league/flysystem-gridfs

Configure `Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__
to use the ``gridfs`` driver in ``config/filesystems.php``:

.. code-block:: php

   'disks' => [
       'gridfs' => [
           'driver' => 'gridfs',
           'connection' => 'mongodb',
           // 'database' => null,
           // 'bucket' => 'fs',
           // 'prefix' => '',
           // 'read-only' => false,
           // 'throw' => false,
       ],
   ],

> You can configure the disk the following settings in ``config/filesystems.php``:

Reviewer: I: I think you can delete "the disk"

```suggestion
You can configure the following settings in ``config/filesystems.php``:
```

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 25 75

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``driver``
     - **Required**. Specifies the filesystem driver to use. Must be ``gridfs`` for MongoDB.

   * - ``connection``

>      - The database connection used to store jobs. It must be a ``mongodb`` connection. The driver uses the default connection if a connection is not specified.

Reviewer: S: remove the article to match the other descriptions
```suggestion
     - Database connection used to store jobs. It must be a ``mongodb`` connection. The driver uses the default connection if a connection is not specified.
```

   * - ``database``
     - Name of the MongoDB database for the GridFS bucket. The driver uses the database of the connection if a database is not specified.

   * - ``bucket``
     - Name or instance of the GridFS bucket. A database can contain multiple buckets identified by their name. Defaults to ``fs``.

   * - ``prefix``
     - Specifies a prefix for the name of the files that are stored in the bucket. Using a distinct bucket is recommended
       in order to store the files in a different collection, instead of using a prefix.

>        The prefix should not start with a leading slash ``/``.

Reviewer: S: Add parentheses around the slash
```suggestion
       The prefix should not start with a leading slash (``/``).
```

   * - ``read-only``
     - If ``true``, writing to the GridFS bucket is disabled. Write operations will return ``false`` or throw exceptions
       depending on the configuration of ``throw``. Defaults to ``false``.

   * - ``throw``
     - If ``true``, exceptions are thrown when an operation cannot be performed. If ``false``,
	   operations return ``true`` on success and ``false`` on error. Defaults to ``false``.

You can also use a factory or a service name to create an instance of ``MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket``.
In this case, the options ``connection`` and ``database`` are ignored:

.. code-block:: php

   use Illuminate\Foundation\Application;
   use MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket;

   'disks' => [
       'gridfs' => [
           'driver' => 'gridfs',
           'bucket' => static function (Application $app): Bucket {
               return $app['db']->connection('mongodb')
                   ->getMongoDB()
                   ->selectGridFSBucket([
                       'bucketName' => 'avatars',
                       'chunkSizeBytes' => 261120,
                   ]);
           },
       ],
   ],

Usage
-----

> A benefit of using Laravel Filesystem is that it provides a common interface

Reviewer: S: Reword so this sentence is a little less subjective

```suggestion
Laravel Filesystem provides a common interface
```

for all the supported file systems. You can use the ``gridfs`` disk in the same
way as the ``local`` disk.

> 

Reviewer: S: introduce the code

```suggestion
The following example writes a file to the ``gridfs`` disk, then reads the file:
```

.. code-block:: php

   $disk = Storage::disk('gridfs');

   // Write the file "hello.txt" into GridFS
   $disk->put('hello.txt', 'Hello World!');

   // Read the file
   echo $disk->get('hello.txt'); // Hello World!

To learn more Laravel File Storage, see
`Laravel File Storage <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/filesystem>`__
in the Laravel documentation.

Versioning
----------

> File names in GridFS are metadata in file documents, which are identified by
> unique ObjectIDs. If multiple documents share the same file name, they are

Reviewer: S: since this is the first time that file metadata documents are mentioned, I think it would be helpful to describe them 

```suggestion
GridFS creates file documents for each uploaded file. These documents contain metadata, including the file name and a
unique ObjectId. If multiple documents share the same file name, they are
```

considered "revisions" and further distinguished by creation timestamps.

The Laravel MongoDB integration uses the GridFS Flysystem adapter. It interacts
with file revisions in the following ways:

- Reading a file reads the last revision of this file name
- Writing a file creates a new revision for this file name
- Renaming a file renames all the revisions of this file name
- Deleting a file deletes all the revisions of this file name

The GridFS Adapter for Flysystem does not provide access to a specific revision

> of a filename. You must use the

Reviewer: S: I'd stay consistent with using either "filename" or "file name"

```suggestion
of a file name. You must use the
```

`GridFS API <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/php-library/current/tutorial/gridfs/>`__
if you need to work with revisions, as shown in the following code:

.. code-block:: php

   // Create a bucket service from the MongoDB connection
   /** @var \MongoDB\GridFS\Bucket $bucket */
   $bucket = $app['db']->connection('mongodb')->getMongoDB()->selectGridFSBucket();

   // Download the last but one version of a file
   $bucket->openDownloadStreamByName('hello.txt', ['revision' => -2])

.. note::

>    If you use a prefix the Filesystem component, you will have to handle it
>    by yourself when using the GridFS API directly.

Reviewer: S: clarify the first part of this sentence ("If you use a prefix the Filesystem component" part)

Q: what do you mean by "handle it by yourself" - could you clarify that in the note?

```suggestion
   If you specify the ``prefix`` GridFS setting, you will have to handle it
   by yourself when using the GridFS API directly.
```
